.\" goban-client man page — install to /usr/share/man/man1/goban-client.1.gz
.TH GOBAN-CLIENT 1 "May 2026" "goban 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
goban-client \- talk to a running goban-daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B goban-client
[\-\-sock \fIPATH\fR]
[\-\-json]
.I COMMAND
[\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B goban-client
is the control plane for
.BR goban-daemon (8).
It connects to the daemon's unix socket and issues commands: status
queries, manual bans / unbans, rule introspection, config reload, and
offline rule testing.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B status
Print daemon version, uptime, source / rule counts and total ban
counter.
.TP
.B rules
List configured rules with hit / ban / miss counters, sliding-window
length, ban duration, and date-parse / drift fallback counts. Use this
to debug rule misconfiguration.
.TP
.B "list" | " banned"
List currently active bans with each entry's TTL and expiration.
.TP
.B "ban " \fIIP\fR " \-\-rule " \fILABEL\fR " [\-\-ttl " \fIDURATION\fR "]"
Manually ban an IP. The \fIrule\fR label is required and recorded in the
audit log; use \fBmanual\fR or a custom string to be explicit. Default
TTL is 1h.
.TP
.B "unban " \fIIP\fR
Remove an active ban. Tolerates missing entries (ENOENT is treated as
success).
.TP
.B reload
Reload configuration from disk. The daemon validates the new config
before swapping; if validation fails, the previous configuration stays
running. Equivalent to sending SIGHUP.
.TP
.B "test \-\-rule " \fINAME\fR " " \fILOGFILE\fR " | " \-
Dry-run a loaded rule against a log file (or stdin). Reports per-IP
simulated bans with first-seen and ban times. Does not modify daemon
state. Use to verify a new regex before reloading.
.TP
.B version
Print client version.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
.TP
.B \-\-sock " " \fIPATH\fR
Override the daemon socket path. Default
.IR /run/goban/goban.sock .
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine-readable JSON instead of formatted text. Applies to status,
rules and banned.
.SH EXAMPLES
Show daemon status:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ goban\-client status
version:    1.0.0
uptime:     2h13m47s
sources:    3
rules:      12
total bans: 47
.fi
.RE
.PP
Manually ban an IP for 12 hours:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ goban\-client ban 198.51.100.7 \-\-rule manual \-\-ttl 12h
banned 198.51.100.7 for 12h0m0s (rule=manual)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Test the sshd rule against a captured log file:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ goban\-client test \-\-rule sshd /var/log/auth.log.1
.fi
.RE
.PP
Tail recent bans in JSON for piping into a SIEM:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ goban\-client \-\-json banned | jq .
.fi
.RE
.SH PERMISSIONS
The daemon's socket defaults to mode 0660 owned by root:goban. Add a
user to the
.B goban
group to permit unprivileged
.B goban-client
use. Failed attempts to talk to the socket exit non-zero with an
explicit error.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
Command failed (socket unreachable, invalid args, daemon-side error).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (bad command name or missing required arg).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR goban-daemon (8),
.BR fail2ban-client (1)
.SH AUTHOR
GoBan is developed by izm1chael. License: MIT.
