.\" goban-daemon man page — install to /usr/share/man/man8/goban-daemon.8.gz
.TH GOBAN-DAEMON 8 "May 2026" "goban 1.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
goban-daemon \- log-tailing IP banner for fail2ban-style protection
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B goban-daemon
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B goban-daemon
watches one or more log sources (files, Docker containers, the systemd
journal) for patterns that indicate authentication abuse, and bans the
matching source IPs at the kernel level via iptables+ipset (default) or
nftables.
.PP
Rules are declared in YAML — each rule pairs a regular expression with a
threshold and a ban duration. When an IP matches the rule's regex more
than \fImax_retries\fR times within \fIfindtime\fR, the daemon adds it to
the kernel's ban set with a per-element TTL of \fIbantime\fR.
.PP
Operators interact with a running daemon through
.BR goban-client (1),
which talks to a unix socket on
.IR /run/goban/goban.sock .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-config " " \fIPATH\fR
Path to the YAML configuration file (default
.IR /etc/goban/goban.yaml ).
.TP
.BR \-rules-dir " " \fIDIR\fR
Override the configured rules_dir. Files matching *.yaml in this directory
are merged with the rules list in the main config at startup.
.TP
.BR \-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h " | " \-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/goban/goban.yaml
Main configuration file. See the example shipped in
.IR /usr/share/doc/goban/goban.yaml.example .
.TP
.I /etc/goban/rules.d/
Drop-in directory for rule files. Each *.yaml is merged at startup
and reloadable via SIGHUP / goban-client reload.
.TP
.I /var/lib/goban/state.gob
Persistent strike state (gob-encoded). Survives daemon restart and host
reboot. Delete to reset all in-flight strike counters.
.TP
.I /var/log/goban/audit.log
JSON-lines audit log; one line per applied ban/unban. The bundled
\fIrecidive\fR rule tails this file for repeat-offender escalation.
.TP
.I /run/goban/goban.sock
Unix socket the daemon listens on for goban-client commands. Defaults
to mode 0660, owned by root:goban.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM " | " SIGINT
Graceful shutdown. State is saved, kernel ban sets are preserved unless
flush_on_exit is set.
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Hot-reload configuration. The daemon diffs the new config against the
running one, adds/removes/modifies rules without dropping unaffected
in-flight bans, and rejects an invalid config (the previous config keeps
running). Equivalent to
.BR "goban-client reload" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean shutdown after a signal.
.TP
.B 1
Startup failure (bad config, missing capability, kernel rejection).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B goban-daemon
ignores environment variables. All configuration is via the YAML file or
command-line flags.
.SH CAPABILITIES
The daemon needs CAP_NET_ADMIN to manage the kernel ban sets. The shipped
systemd unit drops other capabilities. Operators MAY run the daemon as a
non-root user with CAP_NET_ADMIN + CAP_NET_RAW set on the binary, but the
typical configuration is root.
.SH BACKEND SELECTION
The
.I banner.backend
configuration key selects how bans are applied:
.IP \fBiptables\fR
(default) iptables with ipset. Requires the \fBiptables\fR, \fBip6tables\fR
binaries on PATH (only used at Setup for one-time chain-rule install);
hot-path ban operations go through native netlink to the ipset subsystem.
.IP \fBnftables\fR
Native netlink to the nf_tables subsystem (NFNL_SUBSYS_NFTABLES). Creates
table \fIgoban\fR, two timeout-bearing sets, one input-hooked chain, and
two drop rules. No external binary dependencies.
.SH RECIDIVE
GoBan ships a built-in \fBrecidive\fR rule (see
.IR /etc/goban/rules.d/recidive.yaml )
that tails its own audit log and re-bans IPs that have been banned 5+
times in 24 hours for a week. The audit log's JSON format guarantees a
stable field order so the rule's regex doesn't break on minor version
upgrades.
.PP
Defense-in-depth against feedback loops: any rule named exactly
\fBrecidive\fR auto-applies an excludes filter against its own ban events
even if the YAML excludes line is removed.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR goban-client (1),
.BR fail2ban-server (1),
.BR iptables (8),
.BR ipset (8),
.BR nft (8)
.SH BUGS
Report security issues via GitHub Security Advisories at
https://github.com/izm1chael/goban/security/advisories/new
.PP
Bugs and feature requests:
https://github.com/izm1chael/goban/issues
.SH AUTHOR
GoBan is developed by izm1chael. License: MIT.
